# Pain meds and narcotics

If your treatment includes surgery, extended [neutropenia], or a bone marrow
transplant, you will end up on high doses of narcotics at some point. I was not
prepared for how it affected me, and I think patients would benefit from
understanding narcotics better before receiving them.

## Why narcotics?

There are only a few general types of painkillers, technically called
analgesics[^analgesics]:

- Tylenol
- NSAIDs
- Opiates

For reasons I am about to explain, narcotics (specifically opiates) are the only
pain meds available to blood cancer patients.

There are many, many more and some only work in complex combinations for special
circumstances. Since this is not a medical reference manual, let's ignore those.
Your doctor will figure things out if you have special circumstances.

### Tylenol

Tylenol gets its own category for two reasons: modern medicine doesn't actually
understand how it works, and it is a fever reducer.

There are two medical names for tylenol: paracetamol and
acetaminophen[^tylenol]. The only thing you may care about as a patient is that
in the US, it's nearly always called acetaminophen, and in Europe, it's usually
called paracetamol. For the average American, I'm just calling it "tylenol."

Tylenol is pretty effective at mild pain relief, with only two significant side
effects:

- It reduces your fever.
- It hurts your liver.

#### Your fever

As a blood cancer patient, you will be treated with chemo and/or radiation at
some point that will lower your [blood counts]. When your white blood counts are
low [neutropenia], you are at high risk for infections, and a fever is one of
the first signs.

Whenever you feel off in any way, you should check your temperature first for
signs of a fever. Your nurses will be all over it, but you will have home
recovery too. Unfortunately, if you have taken tylenol in the last few hours
(4-6 hours, to be specific), your fever could be "masked" by the tylenol. This
is why you will rarely receive tylenol during your treatment, except maybe
before blood [transfusions].

#### Your liver

Every single pill you take in your life is processed by your liver. The speed
and overall effectiveness of every oral medication you will ever take depends on
the current health of your liver and how heavily taxed it is.

Your liver is a big reason certain pills must be taken with meals, or must not
be taken with meals. Some meds require your body to currently be digesting fat
to form the the correct chemical bonds. The absorption of pills is very complex,
and you may want to do further research on the physiology involved if it
interests you.

In general, with the staggering number of pills you may end up taking during
treatment, it is better for the health of your liver to avoid tylenol when
possible. For example, there is no reason to ever take Tylenol PM unless you are
actually in pain. Tylenol PM is just tylenol and benadryl (25mg diphenhydramine)
in one pill. Two pills of Tylenol PM have the exact same drowsy effect (50mg
diphenhydramine) as two pills of benadryl. It's better to spare your liver the
unneccessary work and just take two benadryl.

### NSAIDs

NSAIDs[^nsaids], or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, represent nearly all
of the over-the-counter pain meds that are not tylenol. Aspirin, ibuprofen, and
naproxen (Aleve) are the most common by far. Ibuprofen is popular with dentists
partially because it [reduces inflammation in the gums faster than
aspirin](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3414241/).

Unfortunately, [prolonged use of NSAIDs is harmful to your digestive
system](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-steroidal_anti-inflammatory_drug#Adverse_effects),
especially to your bowels and kidney. Believe me, the last thing you want to
deal with during cancer recovery is _more_ bowel issues. You will have plenty of
digestive problems already from treatment.

Platelets are the real reason you can't take NSAIDs during cancer treatment.
Many people take aspirin regularly to avoid blood clots: [NSAIDs prevent
platelets from doing their
job](http://paindr.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/Effects-of-NSAIDs-on-Plt-Homeostasis.pdf).
Since platelets do the clotting, your blood is "thinned" and you bleed more.
This is extremely dangerous if your blood counts are currently low from chemo or
radiation. My first ride on an ambulance was for a nosebleed that couldn't be
stopped without a platelet transfusion at 2am.

Aspirin in particular renders your current platelets less effective permanently,
so normal clotting cannot resume until your current batch of platelets have died
and been replaced in about a week. [Ibuprofen's effects are
temporary](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15809457), and your blood should
clot effectively again in about 24 hours. For heart patients, note that
[ibuprofen's effects actually interfere with
aspirin's](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18094224).

[^analgesics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analgesic)
[^nsaids](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-steroidal_anti-inflammatory_drug)
[^tylenol](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paracetamol)

### Opiates (narcotics)

Cancer treatment is rough, and you will almost certainly end up needing pain
relief. Since tylenol and NSAIDs are disqualified, you will end up getting to
know your opiate friends. If you are experienced with chronic pain, this section
may not help you much; you can strategize with your doctor. If you are
inexperienced with opiates (if you're not sure, this is you), knowing what to
expect can make your life far better.

Good doctors will know how essential pain management is for cancer patients,
and they should help you get through without major withdrawal or addiction
concerns. If your doctor is acting flaky, suspicious, or in any way unsupportive
about your pain issues in the beginning (before you are on the meds), I
recommend talking to the other doctors there and consider switching. You do not
want your doctor to ever feel like your enemy.

I was unprepared, and I did not realize how drastically it was affecting me. Had
my parents not intervened, I was about to click a few buttons and blow my
life-savings on the stock market (it seemed like such a good idea at the time).

I like using the word "narcotic" for this category of meds, although "opiate" is
more accurate. Technically, [narcotic originally meant mind-altering and
sleep-inducing, and in the US just means strictly
regulated](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narcotic). Since this is not a medical
journal, I will gladly say narcotic when I mean opiate.

#### PCAs

#### Oral vs. IV
